README.md, before:

# 🍽️ Beyond the Stars: Decoding Customer Voices in Food Reviews
![Optimizing Heart Valve Replacements](visuals/beyond_the_stars.png)


In this project, over 500,000 customer reviews from the Amazon Fine Food Reviews dataset were explored. Through exploratory data analysis (EDA) and sentiment analysis, customer expressions of satisfaction and dissatisfaction were uncovered, going beyond numeric ratings. The goal was to bridge the gap between star ratings and the language of real feedback.

Both traditional NLP techniques (TextBlob & VADER) and transformer-based sentiment models (via Hugging Face) were applied to uncover deeper patterns in how reviews were written by customers.

---

## 📦 Dataset

- **Source:** [Amazon Fine Food Reviews on Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/snap/amazon-fine-food-reviews)
- **Volume:** 568,454 reviews
- **Fields of Interest:**
  - `Text`: Full customer review
  - `Score`: Star rating (1 to 5)
  - `Summary`, `Time`, `UserId`, `ProductId`

---

## 🔍 Project Objectives

- Perform comprehensive EDA on review patterns
- Identify trends in review length, content, and star distribution
- Apply sentiment analysis using:
  - ✅ TextBlob (lexicon-based)
  - ✅ VADER (social media–tuned lexicon-based)
  - ✅ DistilBERT (transformer-based via Hugging Face)
- Compare and visualize sentiment score alignment across models
- Draw actionable insights from text-based customer feedback

---

## 📁 Project Structure

```plaintext
amazon-fine-food-nlp-eda/
│
├── data/
│   └── Reviews.csv                        # Raw dataset (downloaded from Kaggle)
│
├── notebooks/
│   └── 01_eda_sentiment_analysis.ipynb   # Main notebook for EDA + NLP
│
├── scripts/
│   ├── preprocess.py                     # Data cleaning and feature engineering
│   ├── sentiment_analysis.py             # Traditional sentiment scoring (VADER/TextBlob)
│   └── hf_sentiment_model.py             # Transformer-based sentiment scoring (DistilBERT)
│
├── visuals/
│   ├── wordclouds/                       # WordClouds for review texts
│   ├── histograms/                       # Score distributions, review lengths
│   └── correlation_plots/                # Score vs sentiment comparisons
│
├── results/
│   └── sentiment_scores.csv              # Combined sentiment results
│
├── README.md
├── requirements.txt                      # Python dependencies
└── .gitignore
```
---

📊 Key Analyses & Visuals
⭐ Score distribution bar plots

📏 Review length histograms

☁️ Wordclouds for high vs low star reviews

🧠 Frequent bigrams/trigrams

❤️ Sentiment polarity histograms (TextBlob & VADER)

🤖 Comparison with Hugging Face sentiment model (DistilBERT SST-2)

📉 Correlation plots: star score vs sentiment score

📅 Optional: Time series of review volume over time

---

## 🧪 How to Run

1. Clone the repo:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/amazon-fine-food-nlp-eda.git
cd amazon-fine-food-nlp-eda
```

2. Install dependencies:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
3. Launch the notebook:
```bash
jupyter notebook notebooks/01_eda_sentiment_analysis.ipynb
```

🛠️ Tools & Technologies

- Python 3.9+

- Pandas, NumPy, Matplotlib, Seaborn

- NLTK, TextBlob, VADER

- Hugging Face Transformers (distilbert-base-uncased-finetuned-sst-2-english)

- WordCloud, Scikit-learn

- Jupyter Notebook

🔑 License
This project is licensed under the MIT License.

🙋‍♀️ Author
Created by Marwah Mahmood
[LinkedIn Profile](http://www.linkedin.com/in/MarwahFaraj) | [Email](mailto:marwah.faraj777@gmail.com)

Commit message:

update readme file with note about the dataset

README.md, after:

# 🍽️ Beyond the Stars: Decoding Customer Voices in Food Reviews
![Optimizing Heart Valve Replacements](visuals/beyond_the_stars.png)


In this project, over 500,000 customer reviews from the Amazon Fine Food Reviews dataset were explored. Through exploratory data analysis (EDA) and sentiment analysis, customer expressions of satisfaction and dissatisfaction were uncovered, going beyond numeric ratings. The goal was to bridge the gap between star ratings and the language of real feedback.

Both traditional NLP techniques (TextBlob & VADER) and transformer-based sentiment models (via Hugging Face) were applied to uncover deeper patterns in how reviews were written by customers.

---

## 📦 Dataset

- **Source:** [Amazon Fine Food Reviews on Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/snap/amazon-fine-food-reviews)
- **Volume:** 568,454 reviews
- **Fields of Interest:**
  - `Text`: Full customer review
  - `Score`: Star rating (1 to 5)
  - `Summary`, `Time`, `UserId`, `ProductId`

📁 **Note:** The full dataset file `Reviews.csv` has been excluded from this repository due to GitHub’s file size limits.  
You can download it directly from [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/snap/amazon-fine-food-reviews) and place it in the `data/` folder manually.

---

## 🔍 Project Objectives

- Perform comprehensive EDA on review patterns
- Identify trends in review length, content, and star distribution
- Apply sentiment analysis using:
  - ✅ TextBlob (lexicon-based)
  - ✅ VADER (social media–tuned lexicon-based)
  - ✅ DistilBERT (transformer-based via Hugging Face)
- Compare and visualize sentiment score alignment across models
- Draw actionable insights from text-based customer feedback

---

## 📁 Project Structure

```plaintext
amazon-fine-food-nlp-eda/
│
├── data/
│   └── Reviews.csv                        # Raw dataset (downloaded from Kaggle)
│
├── notebooks/
│   └── 01_eda_sentiment_analysis.ipynb   # Main notebook for EDA + NLP
│
├── scripts/
│   ├── preprocess.py                     # Data cleaning and feature engineering
│   ├── sentiment_analysis.py             # Traditional sentiment scoring (VADER/TextBlob)
│   └── hf_sentiment_model.py             # Transformer-based sentiment scoring (DistilBERT)
│
├── visuals/
│   ├── wordclouds/                       # WordClouds for review texts
│   ├── histograms/                       # Score distributions, review lengths
│   └── correlation_plots/                # Score vs sentiment comparisons
│
├── results/
│   └── sentiment_scores.csv              # Combined sentiment results
│
├── README.md
├── requirements.txt                      # Python dependencies
└── .gitignore
```
---

📊 Key Analyses & Visuals
⭐ Score distribution bar plots

📏 Review length histograms

☁️ Wordclouds for high vs low star reviews

🧠 Frequent bigrams/trigrams

❤️ Sentiment polarity histograms (TextBlob & VADER)

🤖 Comparison with Hugging Face sentiment model (DistilBERT SST-2)

📉 Correlation plots: star score vs sentiment score

📅 Optional: Time series of review volume over time


🕒 **Performance Note:**  
Running the full Hugging Face sentiment model (`DistilBERT`) on the entire dataset takes approximately **147 minutes**.  
Once complete, the results will be saved to the `results/sentiment_scores_full.csv` file, which has been excluded from this repository to keep the repo lightweight.

---

## 🧪 How to Run

1. Clone the repo:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/amazon-fine-food-nlp-eda.git
cd amazon-fine-food-nlp-eda
```

2. Install dependencies:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
3. Launch the notebook:
```bash
jupyter notebook notebooks/01_eda_sentiment_analysis.ipynb
```

🛠️ Tools & Technologies

- Python 3.9+

- Pandas, NumPy, Matplotlib, Seaborn

- NLTK, TextBlob, VADER

- Hugging Face Transformers (distilbert-base-uncased-finetuned-sst-2-english)

- WordCloud, Scikit-learn

- Jupyter Notebook

🔑 License
This project is licensed under the MIT License.

🙋‍♀️ Author
Created by Marwah Mahmood
[LinkedIn Profile](http://www.linkedin.com/in/MarwahFaraj) | [Email](mailto:marwah.faraj777@gmail.com)
